# Research
Scientific papers published during my research career

### New Consolidant-Hydrophobic Treatment by Combining SiO2 Composite and Fluorinated Alkoxysilane: Application on Decayed Biocalcareous Stone from an 18th Century Cathedral
##### May 2018Coatings 8(5):170
##### DOI: [10.3390/coatings8050170](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/324917443_New_Consolidant-Hydrophobic_Treatment_by_Combining_SiO2_Composite_and_Fluorinated_Alkoxysilane_Application_on_Decayed_Biocalcareous_Stone_from_an_18th_Century_Cathedral)
##### Abstract:
An effective procedure has been developed to consolidate and hydrophobize decayed monumental stones by a simple sol-gel process. The sol contains silica oligomer, silica nanoparticles and a surfactant, preventing gel cracking. The effectiveness of the process on biocalcareous stone samples from an 18th century cathedral has been evaluated, and it was found that the gel creates effective linking bridges between mineral grains of the stone. Silica nanoparticles produced a significant increase in the mechanical resistance and cohesion of the stone. The application of an additional fluorinated oligomer onto the consolidated stone gave rise to a surface with lasting hydrophobicity, preventing water absorption.

### Producing Lasting Amphiphobic Building Surfaces with Self-Cleaning Properties
##### May 2017Nanotechnology 28(26)
##### DOI: [10.1088/1361-6528/aa73a3](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1361-6528/aa73a3)
##### Abstract:
Nowadays, producing building surfaces that prevent water and oil uptake and which present self-cleaning activity is still a challenge. In this study, amphiphobic (superhydrophobic and oleophobic) building surfaces were successfully produced. A simple and low-cost process was developed, which is applicable to large-scale building surfaces, according the following procedure: (1) By spraying a SiO2 nanocomposite which produces a closely-packed nanoparticle uniform topography; (2) By functionalizing the previous coating with a fluorinated alkoxysilane, producing high hydrophobicity and oleophobicity. The formation of a Cassie-Baxter regime, in which air pockets could be trapped between the aggregates of particles, was confirmed by topographic study. The building surface demonstrated an excellent self-cleaning performance. Finally, the surface presented lasting superhydrophobicity with high stability against successive attachment/detachment force cycles. This high durability can be explained by the effective grafting of the silica nanocomposite coating skeleton with the substrate, and with the additional fluorinated coating produced by condensation reactions.

### Facile preparation of mesoporous silica monoliths by an inverse micelle mechanism
##### March 2017Microporous and Mesoporous Materials 247
##### DOI: [10.1016/j.micromeso.2017.03.041](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1387181117302196?via%3Dihub)
##### Abstract:
A well-known drawback of sol−gel materials is their tendency to crack because of the high capillary pressure supported during drying. We have pioneered a facile and low-cost route to obtain monolithic xerogels, from a silica precursor and a surfactant, mixed under ultrasonic agitation. This route presents a clear interest for practical application at industrial scale. In this paper, a model to explain the formation of silica monoliths in the presence of the surfactant is presented. It is demonstrated that a stable microemulsion of water in the silica oligomer media is produced due to the combined effect of surfactant, producing inverse micelles, and ultrasonic agitation. The model proposed, suggests that the water is encapsulated in the surfactant micelles that act as nanoreactors, producing silica primary particles. The growth of these silica seeds continues outside the micelles until the formation of the constituent particles of the xerogel. Next, the particles are packed, and mesopores are produced from the interparticle spaces. This mesoporosity prevents xerogel cracking because it reduces capillary pressure during gel drying. An in-depth investigation of the structure of the xerogels revealed that they are effectively composed of silica nanoparticles of nearly uniform size values that could match with the size of the surfactant inverse micelles. Finally, it was demonstrated that surfactant and water content present a significant effect on the final structure of the xerogels. An increase of surfactant content produces a reduction in particle size, whereas an increase of water produces an opposite effect.

### Producing superhydrophobic roof tiles
##### February 2016Nanotechnology 27(9):095604
##### DOI: [10.1088/0957-4484/27/9/095604](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0957-4484/27/9/095604)
##### Abstract:
Superhydrophobic materials can find promising applications in the field of building. However, their application has been very limited because the synthesis routes involve tedious processes, preventing large-scale application. A second drawback is related to their short-term life under outdoor conditions. A simple and low-cost synthesis route for producing superhydrophobic surfaces on building materials is developed and their effectiveness and their durability on clay roof tiles are evaluated. Specifically, an organic-inorganic hybrid gel containing silica nanoparticles is produced. The nanoparticles create a densely packed coating on the roof tile surface in which air is trapped. This roughness produces a Cassie-Baxter regime, promoting superhydrophobicity. A surfactant, n-octylamine, was also added to the starting sol to catalyze the sol-gel process and to coarsen the pore structure of the gel network, preventing cracking. The application of ultrasound obviates the need to use volatile organic compounds in the synthesis, thereby making a 'green' product. It was also demonstrated that a co-condensation process effective between the organic and inorganic species is crucial to obtain durable and effective coatings. After an aging test, high hydrophobicity was maintained and water absorption was completely prevented for the roof tile samples under study. However, a transition from a Cassie-Baxter to a Wenzel state regime was observed as a consequence of the increase in the distance between the roughness pitches produced by the aging of the coating.

### Simple Strategy for Producing Superhydrophobic Nanocomposite Coatings In Situ on a Building Substrate
##### July 2013ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 5(15)
##### DOI: [10.1021/am401826g](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/am401826g)
##### Abstract:
Numerous superhydrophobic materials have been developed in recent years by using a combination of two strategies: reducing the surface free energy and roughening the surface. Most of these procedures have the serious drawback of involving tedious multistage processes, which prevent their large-scale application, such as on the external stone and similar material surfaces of buildings exposed to the weather. This paper describes an innovative synthesis route for producing superhydrophobic surface coatings. The coating can even be produced, outdoors, on the building by a low-cost process. We demonstrate that the addition of silica nanoparticles to a mixture of organic and inorganic silica oligomers in the presence of a surfactant produces a coating of closely packed particles. The effect of this is to trap air beneath the water droplets, thus significantly minimizing the contact area between droplet and surface. The organic component reduces the surface free energy of the material, resulting in a high static contact angle. This has the effect of repelling water because the water droplets that form simply roll rapidly down the coated surface. The surfactant plays a valuable role, acting as a sol–gel transition catalyst and, by coarsening the pore structure of the gel network, prevents the coating material from cracking.

### A novel TiO2–SiO2 nanocomposite converts a very friable stone into a self-cleaning building material
##### June 2013Applied Surface Science 275:389–396
##### DOI: [10.1016/j.apsusc.2012.10.142](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169433212018831?via%3Dihub)
##### Abstract:
A TiO2–SiO2 nanocomposite material was formed inside the pore structure of a very friable carbonate stone by simple spraying of a sol containing silica oligomers, titania particles and a non-ionic surfactant (n-octylamine). The resulting nanomaterial provides an effective adhesive and crack-free surface layer to the stone, and gives it self-cleaning properties. In addition, it efficiently penetrates into the pores of the stone, significantly improving its mechanical resistance, and is thus capable of converting an extremely friable stone into a building material with self-cleaning properties. Another important advantage of the nanocomposite is that it substantially improves protection against salt crystallization degradation mechanisms. In the trial described, the untreated stone is reduced to a completely powdered material after 3 cycles of NaSO4 crystallization degradation, whereas stone treated with this novel product remains practically unaltered after 30 cycles. For comparison purposes, two commercial products (with consolidant and photocatalytic properties) were also tested, and both alternative materials produced coatings that crack and provide less mechanical resistance to the stone than this product. These results also confirm the valuable role played by n-octylamine in reducing the capillary pressure responsible for consolidant cracking, and in promoting silica polymerization inside the pores of the non-reactive pure carbonate stone.
